What are the things Paul
was telling Timothy to “be absorbed in”
and to “ponder over”?
And in what sense
do we today make our advancement
clearly seen?
Let’s open our Bibles to 1 Timothy chapter 4
and examine the context.
We begin in the last paragraph
of this chapter.
First Timothy 4:11 says:
“Keep on giving these commands
and teaching them.
“Never let anyone look down on your youth.
“Instead, become an example
to the faithful ones in speaking,
“in conduct, in love,
“in faith, in chasteness.
“Until I come, continue applying yourself
“to public reading,
to exhortation, to teaching.
“Do not neglect the gift in you
that was given you
“through a prophecy when the body of elders
laid their hands on you.
“Ponder over these things;
“be absorbed in them,
“so that your advancement
may be plainly seen by all people.
“Pay constant attention to yourself
and to your teaching.
“Persevere in these things,
for by doing this you will save both yourself
and those who listen to you.”
Well, first note that it says,
“Be absorbed”
—not immersed but “absorbed.”
What’s the difference?
Well, you can drop a whole onion
into a pot of soup,
and if it’s not in there very long,
you can pull it back out
and it’s still an onion.
And the soup tastes basically the same.
But what if you were to prepare that onion
and then drop it in the soup
and leave it there for hours?
Well, then it absorbs into the soup
to the extent that we
simply cannot remove it any longer.
If we are absorbed in something,
we become part of it.
The Greek word for “be absorbed in”
literally translates
“in these things be you.”
Some older translations say
“give thyself wholly to.”
So, what is the soup, as it were,
into which we are to be absorbed?
Well, verse 12 lists ‘speaking,
conduct, love, faith, and chasteness.’
So we ask ourselves,
‘Are these qualities and actions
what I am?’
How is our advancement plainly seen,
for instance, in the way we speak?
Now, this is not referring
to public speaking privileges.
Timothy had been a well-known traveling elder
for upward of ten years before he received
this letter from Paul.
But his advancement would be plainly seen
in his loyalty and in the way his speech
reflected his love and his faith.
Now, regarding speech,
turn with me, please, to James chapter 1
—James chapter 1.
In this verse,
James points out the impact
that our speech can have on our worship.
He wrote at James 1:26:
“If any man thinks
“he is a worshipper of God but does not keep
“a tight rein on his tongue,
“he is deceiving his own heart,
and his worship
is futile.”
Other older translations say,
“This man’s religion is vain.”
This, in fact, is one of the texts
that drew our brothers
to the conclusion that there is a distinction
between true religion and false religion.
Never would we want
to show the spirit of false religion,
deceiving ourselves into thinking
that as long as we do some good,
God won’t care if our words
are mean or untrue.
No, we “keep a tight rein on [our] tongue.”
And that expression
“keep a tight rein on” reminds us
of James’ horse illustration at James 3:3.
Keeping a tight rein on our tongue
does not mean that we never speak
any more than keeping a tight rein
on a horse means that you never ride it.
No, a horse is valuable, powerful, beautiful,
and it can be very useful
when trained.
So we use our gift of speech,
but we control what we say
so that it has the effect
we want and the effect Jehovah wants.
Our speech can reveal the degree
to which we have made spiritual progress.
Now, today, most don’t serve
in congregations like Ephesus,
where Paul asked Timothy
to keep working as a bulwark
against “false stories”
and “misleading inspired statements
and teachings of demons.”
But we can set a powerful example
in the way we speak.
We work with people here in Bethel
and in our congregations.
The 133rd Psalm says that Jehovah’s blessing
is where brothers “dwell together in unity.”
First Peter 4:14 says that Jehovah’s spirit
is “resting” upon the congregation.
So there’s a blessing when we work together.
No one human has every quality needed
to see a project through to its completion.
And when we come together, we speak.
We talk about how to get the job done.
At times, we consider:
Is this a good plan of action?
Is our work being done well?
Is it effective?
Is it being carried out in harmony
with published guidelines?
Is it genuinely helpful?
In that process,
people who have poured hours of work
into a project could find that their feelings
are keenly attuned
to the answers to those questions.
But what happens if someone
takes exception to the way
we have done our job?
What if they point out a problem,
but their solution
is worse than the problem itself?
Will we stop listening to them
or stop respecting them?
Could we be grateful for their perspective
that something is not quite right
while at the same time
continuing to seek a solution?
What words will we use?
This could be a very good opportunity
for us to “become an example
to the faithful ones in speaking.”
Have you ever noticed that some people
consistently show gratitude
and are rich with words of commendation,
even when they’re offering correction?
And it’s not just a technical formula
—the “counsel sandwich”—
commendation, counsel, commendation.
No, it’s valid
—words that took real observation
and appreciation coming from a person
who on other occasions
only shows encouragement.
Or, you know, those elders who can enter
into the most stressful situation
and just get everybody laughing
and then offer frank counsel if needed
but then keep everybody in a good mood?
It’s an art.
Never make the mistake of thinking,
‘He’s just a natural.’
No, that is advancement.
So many in our Bethel family have this skill.
We appreciate them.
Become an example to the faithful ones
in speaking.
But Paul also mentions conduct
and chasteness.
How good it is to be surrounded
by examples of those who truly delight
in maintaining
Jehovah’s high moral standards.
And 1 Timothy 4:12 also mentions
becoming an example “in love.”
If Timothy had been harsh or unkind
in the way he dealt
with his fellow believers,
what effect could that have had on all
the good work he had accomplished already
as a teacher and an overseer?
And we also set an example
for the faithful ones in faith.
Our faith
can be seen in our ability
to discern Jehovah’s hand
and the way he’s backing and blessing
the work that we’re doing.
Can we build Ramapo under lockdown?
How can we make videos when we can’t
get 20 people together in a small space?
How do we make disciples if we have to stay
six feet away from everyone?
But what have we seen?
Ramapo is ahead of schedule.
JW Broadcasting® is more useful than ever.
Congregation meetings
are better attended than before.
And thousands of new disciples
are still being baptized every week.
Why?
Because “all things are possible” with God
if one has faith.
Become an example to the faithful ones
in speaking, in conduct,
in love, in faith, in chasteness.
That’s the soup.
Ponder over these things,
be absorbed in them,
and in that way your advancement
will be plainly seen.